Objective SU-01**: The applicant should capture the accuracy and fidelity of the reference model in order to support the verification of the accuracy of the surrogate model.
Objective SU-02**: the applicant should identify, document and mitigate the additional sources of uncertainties linked with the use of a surrogate model.
Objective EXP-01**: The applicant should identify the list of stakeholders, other than end users, that need explainability of the AI-based system at any stage of its life cycle, together with their roles, their responsibilities and their expected expertise (including assumptions made on the level of training, qualification and skills).
Objective EXP-02**: For each of these stakeholders (or groups of stakeholders), the applicant should characterise the need for explainability to be provided, which is necessary to support the development and learning assurance processes.
Anticipated MOC EXP-02**: The need for explainability should at least support the following goals: — Strengthening the input-output link; — Detection of residual bias in the trained and/or inference model; and — Absence of unintended behaviours.
Objective EXP-03**: The applicant should identify and document the methods at AI/ML item and/or output level satisfying the specified AI explainability needs.
Objective EXP-04**: The applicant should design the AI-based system with the ability to deliver an indication of the level of confidence in the AI/ML constituent output, based on actual measurements or on quantification of the level of uncertainty.
Objective EXP-05**: The applicant should design the AI-based system with the ability to monitor that its inputs are within the specified ODD boundaries (both in terms of input parameter range and distribution) in which the AI/ML constituent performance is guaranteed.
Objective EXP-06**: The applicant should design the AI-based system with the ability to monitor that its outputs are within the specified operational AI/ML constituent performance boundaries.
Objective EXP-07**: The applicant should design the AI-based system with the ability to monitor that the AI/ML constituent outputs (per Objective EXP-04) are within the specified operational level of confidence.
Anticipated MOC EXP-07**: Assuming that the decisions, actions, or diagnoses provided by an AI- based system may not always be fully reliable, the AI-based system should compute a level of confidence in its outputs. Such an indication should be part of the elements provided within the explanations as needed.
Objective EXP-08**: The applicant should ensure that the output of the specified monitoring per the previous three objectives are in the list of data to be recorded per MOC EXP-09-2.
Objective EXP-09**: The applicant should provide the means to record operational data that is necessary to explain, post operations, the behaviour of the AI-based system and its interactions with the end user, as well as the means to retrieve this data.
Anticipated MOC EXP-09-1**: The recording should automatically start before or when the AI-based system is operating, and it should continue while the AI-based system is operating. The recording should automatically stop when or after the AI-based system is no longer operating.
Anticipated MOC EXP-09-2**: The recorded data should contain sufficient information to detect deviations from the expected behaviour of the AI-based system, whether it operated alone or interacting with an end user. In addition, this information should be sufficient: (a) to accurately determine the nature of each individual deviation, its time and the amplitude/severity of that individual deviation (when applicable); (b) to reconstruct the chronological sequence of inputs to and outputs from the AI-based system during the deviation, and to the extent possible, before the deviation; (c) for monitoring trends regarding deviations over longer periods of time.
Anticipated MOC EXP-09-3**: The means to retrieve the recorded data should be provided to those entitled to access and use it in a way so that they can perform an effective monitoring of the safety of AI-based system operations. This includes: (a) (b) (c) timely and complete access to the data needed for that purpose; access to the tools and documentation necessary to convert the recorded data in a format that is understandable and appropriate for human analysis; possibility to gather the recorded data over longer periods of time and possibility to automatically process part of this data for trend analyses and statistical studies.
Anticipated MOC EXP-09-4**: The recorded data should contain sufficient information to accurately reconstruct the operation of the AI-based system and its interactions with the end user before an accident or incident. In particular, this information should be sufficient to: (a) accurately reconstruct the chronological sequence of inputs to and outputs from the AI- based system; (b) identify when communication or cooperation/collaboration between the AI-based system and the end user was degraded. This may require recording additional communications of the end user with other HAT members or with other organisations (including voice communications), or recording additional actions performed by the end user at their workstation (for instance, by means of images), as necessary; identify any unexpected behaviour of the AI-based system that is relevant for explaining the accident or incident.
Anticipated MOC EXP-09-5**: The data should be recorded in a way so that it can be retrieved and used after an accident or an incident. This includes: (a) (b) (c) (d) if the AI-based system is airborne, a crashworthy memory medium on board the aircraft; recording technology that is reliable and capable of retaining data for long periods of time without electrical power supply; if the AI-based system is airborne, means to facilitate the retrieval of the data from the memory medium after an accident (e.g. means to locate the accident scene and the memory media, tools to retrieve data from damaged memory media) or an incident; provision of tools and documentation necessary to convert the recorded data in a format that is understandable and appropriate for human analysis.